Before us, nice and early, earlier than anticipated.
Um, we will work to the structured agenda as best we can,
uh, but we keep these, um,
interactions relatively, uh, fluid.
But as you will see, it allows, um, for you, uh,
and any of your executive team, um, uh, a few minutes
for some introductory remarks,
and then we are into the overall performance
of IR for 24 20. So, welcome.
Thank you, uh,
Koto.
Uh, Mr. Chairperson, uh, committee members.
Thank you very much for the opportunity
to speak with you today.
Uh, I'm joined on the front bench, uh, by David Carrigan,
uh, deputy Commissioner Policy,
and to my right, uh, Lisa Barrett
and James Grayson, uh, deputy Commissioners for, uh,
customer compliance, uh, individuals
and business other way around.
Sorry. Uh, tax grew
to 116.6 billion last year.
This is reflective of a successful year from land revenue
as we've delivered our core business of collecting
and distributed money and implementing the government's tax
and social policy work program.
Maintaining the integrity of the tax system remains
critical, and we have strong systems
and processes in place to support this.
Where mistakes or unintended errors occur,
we take them seriously
and focus on delivering solutions quickly
and in the most appropriate ways.
Over the past year, inland revenue has continued
to build on the strong technology foundations
and the new systems processes
and people capabilities
that business transformation enabled.
We acknowledge that the rate of revenue growth has flattened
compared to previous years, a reflection
of the broader economic conditions, which some individuals
and businesses have found challenging.
We've continued to make it easier
and simpler to get things right
and hard to get things wrong with 94.5%
of our main taxes being income tax.
GST and PAYE paid on time.
This is significant and shows the current approach
to encouraging and supporting voluntary compliance
with a broad-based tax system is largely successful.
While a number of people
who don't do the right thing is relatively small,
their actions have a significant
impact on those around them.
And we have a strong focus on tackling tax debt,
which reached 9.3 billion in 2025.
In the last year, 4.3 billion in overdue tax
and entitlement debt was collected.
The investment in our compliance activities
of 61.5 million per annum across budgets 24
and 25 is being used to good effect.
We've significantly increased our audit
and enforcement activities
and focused on high risk sectors,
including property non-compliance, trusts,
organized crime, and the hidden economy.
We're also making use of data
and insights in new ways to better target our interventions.
We're seeing positive results
with the return on investments from compliance interventions
reaching $11.80
for every dollar spent against this year's target of $10.
This compares with $9 50 for the 2324 year.
We've also delivered a range of government priorities,
including Family Boost and more recently investment boost.
We're actively making better use
of the digital tools available to us, which enable us
to be more efficient and effective.
Part of this includes keeping pace with technology,
and we're working to understand the opportunities digital
tools like AI provide for us
and our customers, as well as how it might be used
by other parties who might, might seek
to disrupt our business.
In terms of the public service,
we make a broader contribution
through engaging in partnerships
and information sharing
where it can deliver greater value and better results.
Examples include contributing to the all
of government focus on digitizing public services
and being part of the multi-agency effort
to combat organized crime.
We also partnered with the Ministry of Education
to deliver Family Boost,
and we have more than 60 information sharing agreements
with over 20 government agencies.
All of our work has been delivered while making savings
to our baseline appropriation, managing cost pressures
and self-funding, some policy initiatives
to meet the government's focus on reducing
public sector costs.
This has led us to look for more innovative ways
to do things and improve service delivery.
Our people have continued to work hard,
which has resulted in us meeting
or exceeding our targets in many areas.
I'm really proud of their dedication
and commitment, coupled with a respectful
and empathetic approach to those who need our help
as we work together to deliver a tax
and social policy system for all New Zealanders.
Thank you for the opportunity to do an introduction,
and we're really happy to take your questions at this point.
Okay, thank you. We're gonna go to, um,
the honorable Dr. Deborah Russell.
Uh, lovely to see you, Peter. Likewise, the team.
Um, um, I, I've got a number
of things I wanna work, ask about.
I'm not quite sure what order, the order they'll come up in,
but let's start on debt collection.
Yeah. Um,
and in particular, um,
I appreciate the way IR goes about it's debt collection
and, um, I know the way you work with people
to help 'em keep on the right side of it.
Um, so that's not an issue.
It is just, uh, really discussion
that's been in the papers in the last few days.
Um, and as, as, as an ongoing issue is the extent
to which firms carry on, even though they owe GST
and PAYE, and again, I appreciate you work alongside them,
but they carry on, um, while they're actually insolvent,
and that means that other creditors don't know what's going
on because I worked on this issue back in the 2004,
2005 or something like that.
And it's, I know it's a longstanding issue.
I guess there's a, um, a problem here, you know,
because we want, and we don't,
and then revenue gets treated as the lender of last resort.
But equally, if you move on those companies with GST
and PAY, you might also end up being treated
as the liquidator of first resort.
Can you just talk us through how you're trying
to balance those concerns?
Yeah. Um, and look, you are right.
Uh, one of the areas our biggest debt is coming out of GST
and PAYE
and in many ways that's funding that shouldn't be available
for businesses is cash flow.
It's largely being, being held
and taken as a pass through to the crown.
So, um, in the first instance, obviously, um, we are working
with companies that have those debts
and seeing if they can get into a
repayment plan that will work.
We are looking at a number of ways to try
and encourage firms not to use
that funding in the way that they have been.
And there's a whole range
of things we're looking at in there.
Uh, whether it's placing greater responsibility on
directors, uh, we, we've ramped up the use
of credit reporting for companies so that those in debt,
there's much more transparency and visibility,
or there will be, uh, we're also looking at the question
of whether we should or could
or should reduce the time difference between reporting
and payment, uh, in some other jurisdictions.
Those, those requirements are made at the same time.
So at the, at the point at which you file is the point at
which you are expected to pay.
So I think there are a whole range of things we can do,
and we've started to turn the dial
on a number of those already.
And, and credit reporting is one of those
where we've already started to, um, to increase, um,
our use of that tool.
Uh, you'll also have seen, you know, the reality is
that we are the, the primary liquidator or, or,
or party that tends to put people into receivership.
And those, the, the rate at which we are doing
that has gone up significantly on the previous year.
Now, that's a double whammy
because obviously there were a bunch of firms through COVID
who probably should have parked up
and gone home during that period and didn't.
So what we're seeing is a bit of a double whammy,
but at the same time, I think, you know, we we're,
we're quite actively talking to those individuals
and where, where it doesn't look like they can make the
payments, the best thing we can do is
to is to close 'em down.
Yeah. And,
and to, since you, you know, the number of solutions
that are possible there, but Yeah.
Um, holding directors personally responsible might do the
trick or it might not Yep.
Um, that paying over the GST and IR
and PAY as you return it, um, that sounds quite promising,
but presumably that would have quite a, um, a,
an administrative burden for you in terms
of actually setting up the systems to do that.
Yeah, the, well, the administrative burden
probably won't be huge.
Um, look, I think the reality is that if we, if we were
to do that in a, in a compulsory sense, you know,
the reality is that firms have been used to having some use
of that money for a period of time.
So there will be some resistance to, to any, any change.
I think in the first instance, even just giving
entities the option of paying earlier, so those
that understand that they shouldn't be using this and that,
and that it just, it actually doesn't help them using it
'cause they end up further, you know,
digging the hole further in the ditch, uh,
than they really desirably should be.
We at least can create that as an option.
And that's part of what we're looking at.
It will require legislative change ultimately if we wanna
make it, you know, more, more direct.
Can't imagine that there's many firms who'd want
to pay their debts early.
Well, just, just,
Yeah. I mean, you'd be surprised.
Um, well, many,
there probably aren't that many,
but there are tax payers who actually see the obligation
to pay as, as an obligation,
and they don't want to be, uh, in arrears.
Um, you know, I I,
I occasionally do get correspondence from people
who are saying, you know, how do, how do I make a payment
faster than, you know, or on behalf of someone else?
In fact, with one correspondence I got recently.
So there are taxpayers out there who will do that.
Some firms I think will do it if they, if they think it's
of benefit to them not to find themselves in a situation
where they have a debt they weren't expecting. Mm.
Yeah. But they're not gonna be
a problem debtors, are they?
Prob Well, they, they probably won't be the ones
that are racking up the big debt
because they're more likely to be on that cusp. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Okay. I ask a up on that. Yeah, hang on, pepper.
I'm, I'm okay. Yeah. Yeah. We've got a number of subs
Here. We've gotta get a Chloe first.
Close all.
Yeah, I, I mean, I was just holding to interrogate
that a little bit further in terms of, I guess
what this may indicate in terms of future trends
and you were just sort of changes or
otherwise, could you unpack risk?
What options are actually on the table
and what you are considering?
Well, look, it's, it's very early in terms of options.
So the things I've talked about are things that we, so some
of the things we are doing at the moment,
like increasing credit reporting,
so we already have the opportunity to do that.
Uh, we are looking at whether the thresholds we currently
apply are, are good enough.
Um, but even within those thresholds,
we haven't really been making use of that tool.
So we've started, I think we started the
trial at the beginning of October.
That's right. Mid October. October, um, we, uh, 30 30.
Yeah. Were, we had, we identified and,
and, uh, communicated with 30 businesses advising them
that we were gonna be putting, uh, giving their names
to credit companies.
Um, of that we had about a 30% response who contacted us,
uh, and looked to take some action,
whether it was setting up a repayment plan, uh, one,
I think actually put themselves into voluntary liquidation.
Mm-hmm. So, uh,
and we've, we've, that, that has continued into November.
Uh, and I think the, probably two
or three days ago was the, the day for
that first trial at first 30 was gonna be reported.
Yeah. So we'll see what sort of response we get to that.
And we are looking, as I say, at changing those thresholds.
Some of the other things like, um,
changing the time difference between, um, you know,
the submitting your, your, um, um, table
and, and the payment.
Those are things that we've really,
we haven't developed fully yet, that, that's just some ideas
and because it's something that's often
done in other countries.
Mm-hmm. Um, I don't know if they were joking,
but in talking to the Germans a couple of weeks ago,
you know, they were basically saying, uh, you,
you pay the day you put your, your, your file in,
and if you don't pay within two weeks, we come in
and seize whatever assets we need to to cover it.
And I thought, that's an interesting idea.
Uh, I'm not sure we're go that far,
but we take all of these, take all of these ideas, uh,
and try and out what, what will be best for our
Environment.
Um, so, so some
of those ideas are much more nascent in terms
of thinking about what it would look like
and what the pros and cons were.
And I think before we would do something like that,
we would want to test it with, you know, with the community.
I guess part of what I'm trying to unpack here. Yeah.
'cause as you alluded to, I think there's a 49% uptick
and based on I think Rbn Z's report, 70%, uh, uh,
the financial stability report, 70%
of recent liquidations have been initiated by IRD.
Yeah. Um, I guess in the engagement with those businesses,
what are they telling you?
Is it like a financial literacy issue in terms
of treating it as a form of cheap lending?
Is it just current economic circumstances? Yeah. Could you,
I don't know if you have any Yeah, no.
So I think we've done quite a bit
of thinking in the debt space over the last year in
particular because we've been aware
that the debt box continuing to grow.
And what that's told us is that the debt book
as it's currently stands, is made up
of predominantly small businesses.
Yeah. It's a lot of the, um,
context we get from our small business customers is
that we should focus on the big end of town
because that's where most of the debt is.
What we've discovered is that's not the case.
Um, in fact, in the last year, I think, um,
debt growth has been 77% in
that small business in SME area of town.
So that's, that's quite important. Mm-hmm.
We also know that, um, $5.5 billion of
that total debt tax debt from that's current, um, is made up
of PAYN Gs T and RWT.
So that's quite significant as well.
That means that a number
of these small businesses are actually using that money
for working capital effectively.
Um, and then we also know it's getting increasingly old,
and once it gets to over two years, we,
we've got very little chance of actually collecting it.
Mm-hmm. Um, we know that having sort
of looked into why you're not playing,
there's probably a few reasons for that.
Mm-hmm. Um, largely, well, we know that
during COVID inland revenue had
to take its foot off the accelerator a bit in terms
of its enforcement function.
Mm-hmm. And that has had an impact.
Um, but we are now moving back into that space.
Um, we think that probably as a result of the sort
of broader economic cost of living
that is having an impact as well.
Mm-hmm. Um, and that's,
these are all things that we are thinking about.
So what we've really been focusing on is, um, as a result
of the additional funding that we got from government
and budget 24 and 25, really putting more effort into
that debt space, um, that's meant we've been able
to put a lot more people into actual campaigns to touch base
with, um, with small businesses earlier.
Um, so recently we've done some campaigns.
We've had a number of our people contacting,
I think it was over 6,000 small business customers
who had small debt over, I think it was just over $500
of overdue, PAYE or,
or, um, GST on the basis that the earlier we talked to them,
the better chance we have to help them get out
of getting into that position.
And, um, I think that was about a third
of them actually paid it off immediately,
which was actually a really good response.
We've actually just started a campaign
where we are visiting, um, a clutch of, um,
of companies who have over $10,000 worth of debt and the GST
and PAYE area.
And in a few sort of week of doing those visits,
what we've discovered is that one in six
of them are just paying it off completely.
Mm-hmm. So there's a lot
of different things playing out here.
Mm-hmm. But we're really wanting
to use the information we have, the data we have to try
and inform how we work with our customers to ensure
that they can actually manage
themselves out of the situation.
That's our optimum. Yeah.
Taking a liquidation action is absolutely our last
resort. We don't wanna do that.
Yeah. And I totally take on board that fact as well as
how debt collection, while a function
of year is probably not the ideal, uh, way of operating,
I guess that kind of speaks to take on board that you're
learning and trying to understand the
thematics and the drivers here.
But I guess in the spirit of breaking down the silos
of government, are you working with other agencies, I guess,
about what other responses could potentially look like
to prevent getting into the debt in the first place?
Like Yeah. How is that, what does that look like?
You talk a little bit about Yeah.
So we've been engaging with mv, um, quite a bit recently
to talk to them about what's within the art of the possible
of us working together in this space.
I think some of the areas that we're quite keen
to explore are information sharing, obviously.
Um, we have approved information sharing arrangements
and we continue to build on those.
Um, the Phoenix companies area seems to be another area
that's kind of right, um, that we could actually look into.
Um, we do provide information around directors that we see
that might be breaching duties and things.
There's probably, probably something there
that we can do a bit more of as well,
but it's a continual conversation.
Mm-hmm. And it's one where we wanting
to get a bit more clarity quite soon, I think, about
what are the tangible things that we are going
to focus on together next year.
Mm-hmm. And I guess just finally on that point, um,
you know, it is incredibly easy to start up on
with the viability company, um, in this country.
And that's kind of what I was touching on earlier
with regard to the financial literacy point.
Yeah. Um, I guess, you know, maybe this is just a bit
of an open-ended question in which you could potentially
elaborate on Yeah.
How, how this is factoring into any
engagement you may be having, whether it is with MB
or with treasurer or otherwise, in terms
of just those insights that you have from
where things are falling apart.
Yeah, we do do, so when someone sets up a company, we, we,
um, become aware of that and we contact them
and invite them to some, you know,
some effectively education sessions on
what their obligations are,
how they go about fulfilling them.
So I think one of the
good things about New Zealand is it is relatively costly,
a low cost to set up a business.
So that's actually a positive thing for us.
I think the key for us is to make sure that we get in early
and help the set themselves up for success.
Mm. So we are reaching out, uh, in, you know,
the way I described, we're doing things like, um, you know,
in in the trades area, you know, wrapping buildings
and putting a little sign on the building saying actually,
if you're a subbie, come and have a talk to us.
And, and again, we get surprising number of calls out
of something as simple as that,
or the promotion we do with Bunnings, just reminding people
that they do have an obligation if they're not sure how
to do it, get in touch with us.
And, uh, I think sort of some of the numbers that, um,
Lisa talked about, you know, we,
we do get a reasonably good response to some of those 25,
30% sometimes, which effectively is like a cold call.
Uh, and
'cause it's not that well targeted in some ways it's
as targeted as we can get it.
Uh, and that tells you something that,
that I think does signal that in general,
people don't start out wanting to try and beat the system.
They ju and, and when they do contact us often it's just
that they haven't been fully aware of
what their obligations are or how to fulfill 'em.
Mm-hmm. Or the easiest way to fulfill them.
If I can just have another one, uh,
just to, to that point.
Yeah. Um, you know, we see a lot
of these online tax agents advertising themselves when it
comes to people getting their tax returns
and they take quite substantive cuts from people,
and then there's all of other potential issues
around privacy and data and otherwise.
Um, but I guess has there been any thinking from the IRD
about how potentially minimized the role
of those potentially,
potentially potentially unscrupulous players?
Uh, and simplify, I guess, regular people's engagement
with the IRD, whether they be in small limited liability or,
So I think, um, I'll, I'll hand over to Lisa
to talk a little bit about how we're thinking about,
you know, um, quality of some of those parties.
But, but actually those intermediaries can play a really
important role for us.
Mm. Um, they, they have often been quite innovative in
coming up with, uh, ways to help small businesses
that we could never do
because they're much more able to, to tailor their services.
And as a result of that many, you know,
a lot more small businesses are able
to fulfill their obligations through those avenues.
So I think, um, that ecosystem is really important.
And, and actually over the last four
or five years we've become quite interdependent on that.
But we are aware of, of that issue of, um,
the quality of, of the parties.
Um, Lisa, you wanna talk about that?
Absolutely. And I, I might hand over
to David in a second actually,
'cause this is more of a policy project,
but, um, just to note actually, with the tax agents,
we talked about construction,
which Peter talked about earlier in that sector, um,
89% of, um, construction small businesses
that have a tax agent, we know
that they pay their tax on time.
So in that actually working really, really well, I think,
um, and that's ultimately what we'd like to get
to in this sort of area, but
what we have identified is the need to actually look at
that sort of clutch of intermediaries,
whether it be tax agents or digital service providers
or others, um, and,
and think about how we might adjust our occupational
regulation around that to make it work better for us.
And David, do you wanna talk about that project? Sure, sure.
Yeah. So, um, if you look at our, our tax law that relates
to agents, it's very, very old fashioned.
It was written easy when the agent
typically was the accountant.
Um, now increasingly, um, particularly small businesses are,
um, using, you know,
the agents essentially a software provider.
Mm-hmm. And what, what we're finding is it's very hard to
shoehorn a software provider into our old fashioned rules.
So what we are doing is a project to update those rules,
to take into account that that agents are,
you know, software providers.
They can be Henry, they can be, you know, zero,
they can all, all, all those sort sort sorts of things.
Um, but part of that is also looking at things like, um,
because essentially what you're doing is you are allowing
these agents to have a direct feed into inland revenue and,
and accessing customer's information.
Yeah. Right. So as part of that, what you really wanna do,
it can, is make sure that I've got good rules for have,
has the underlying customer actually consented.
Mm-hmm. So it is quite a bit of work.
Um, but that's, that's, um, that's,
that's the project basically. Yeah.
And probably, sorry,
I was gonna say, it's probably worth mentioning.
I think one of the things we focus a lot on too is the
strongest thing I think we can do is focus on simple,
high quality digital services.
If you look at how we used to run personal tax summaries
years ago, that there was a third party industry
that would target people and say, we can get your refund.
And it seemed kind of complex
and the suitable alternative for lots of customers,
the second we automated that process, we mm-hmm.
Took those players out of the market.
So I think having a strong focus on making sure we have good
digital services that are accessible, sort
of another angle on trying to make sure that some
of those don't, uh, enter unnecessarily
and take, you know, a clip out
of someone else's refund. Mm-hmm.
And I guess to your point around particularly kind
of tradies and ensuring that they're aware
of their obligations and otherwise, uh,
a substantial constituency
that approaches me in Auckland Central as those
who work within arts and culture in particular,
so very precarious lives, so oscillate between having
to deal with the IRD and then MSD, uh,
and you know, all of the work that comes in between.
Absolutely. Uh, those kind of sole traders, particularly in
that area, um, do frequently approach me
as their local MP from a sense of real frustration about
how they don't feel like the IRD understands them,
and particularly to the point around COVID
and the responses, they felt
that things came down harder on them
than some of the big guys.
I guess what engagement at all have you had in
that specific area
That look so sole traders? Um,
Or self-employed? Yeah,
yeah, yeah. Particularly in arts and culture here.
Yeah. I'm talking about very precarious. Okay.
Yeah. Understood. And,
and I think, um, uh, I mean, in many ways they are both a,
one of the groups that can tend to be,
find themselves in debt very easily.
Totally. Because often they're, you know, they,
they're in a system that is more complex.
Mm-hmm. Particularly if they're in a world
of working out provisional tax.
And if you don't understand that, it can be a nightmare.
I don't understand it. So it becomes a nightmare.
Um, I think picking up James's point, one of the things we,
one of the pieces of work we have underway at the moment is
thinking about that's more how we,
how we have devised our tax system for small businesses.
Now, this is not something we're gonna resolve in two
or three months, but I think having had the success in the
individual space with the way we've shifted
to effectively doing the tax returns for many individuals
and recognizing the complexity that comes
with provisional tax, we're wanting to rethink that
to see whether there is a much simpler way
of setting up the tax system for small business,
so self-employed and so on.
So again, that's a piece of work we have started.
It's still, again, in a quite early stages
'cause it's quite a hard thing to do.
Hard thing to do. Yeah. Yeah.
Um, but I think it, it's really just recognizing that it is,
you know, unlike for some other parts of our system,
that is relatively the more complex part.
And if you think about the business transformation program,
the one area where we were not as successful
as we would've liked was actually reducing the compliance
costs for small businesses.
Mm. And that I think, is reflective of the settings.
The fact that it's a complex tax system complex we're,
If I can just put on a final point of
Efficacy, well, I, we to, if you
Can collaborate with the Ministry of Arts culture
and heritage on this to reach those artists,
I think that'd be a huge help. Yeah. Okay.
Thank you. We're gonna go to Ryan Hamilton.
Thanks, um, chair
and thank you, um, Peter, it's a very good conversation
and, um, some of your colleagues were talking
to us the other day about the taxation bill
that we've got going through Parliament
and that the issue of Prov tax came up.
You've talked a lot about the GST
and the payroll, you know, cashflow debt challenges,
but obviously provisional tax can,
can fly into that as well.
And so I'm wondering, um, and I,
and I appreciate, ID can't endorse, you know,
third party providers, but I guess a great example
of zero actually probably led IRD into
that digital transformation in some ways
with the online returns.
Um, are you able to, um, perhaps make more aware,
um, these small businesses, um, so et cetera, the,
the ability to connect to those tax pooling entities and,
and the other point on, um, to smooth out
that prob tax cashflow issue.
And the other one of course is, um, PA PAY in particular.
Some, some companies will now use auto pay mm-hmm.
You know, and now direct it,
but the, you know, PAY
so it doesn't become an issue anymore.
Yeah. Um, what are you doing in that space to explore,
mitigate, you know, yeah.
Well that, that's the first point
you make is a really important one.
It's one we talk about quite a bit actually, which is that,
you know, the way the system is now built up,
it is a true ecosystem
and there are players in the market who are able to deal
with parties much better than we can deal with 'em direct.
Um, uh, obviously we have to be careful, uh, in not
endorsing one particular provider over another,
but the idea of supporting access,
encouraging access to software providers, for example, or,
or platforms or, you know, whatever the particular, um,
solution is, um, for the reasons
that Lisa talked about before.
'cause those who are engaged in the system have an agent
of some form, tend to be more compliant.
And, and I don't, and I don't mean
that they're deliberately trying not to be compliant,
but being part of a system makes them more compliant.
And some of the opportunities
that things like tax pooling give people, um, you know,
again, it's a, it's a great example of the market coming up
with a solution to a problem that we could never fix.
But that, but that, you know, um, they're able to,
to provide a service
where individuals benefit from that polling concept.
So the short answer is, um, that was a long answer.
The short answer is we are keen to support
and to encourage people to look at that as an option.
You know, part of the challenge is the cost, uh,
which is something we don't have any control over,
but we'll continue to look and,
and encourage the market to respond where we think it can.
Um, sorry, your second question was about smart,
Like smart PayPal.
Yeah. Yeah. You know, I, I use and it's streamlined my life.
Yeah. And it means you don't have
to have a big PAY payment every month. Yeah.
You know, and, and again, I think that's a great example
of the market coming up with a solution that, uh,
ultimately helps the individuals
because it does reduce the chances
that they'll inadvertently find themselves in a debt
situation and actually makes the system work.
When we, when we talk to, um, the providers and,
and we engage quite a lot with them, you know, they're very,
um, they're very keen to contribute
to the efficiency of the system.
So, you know, part of it is of,
of course they're looking for business opportunities.
And again, the tax pooling concept was a great example
of them responding to that.
But, you know, we, we, we work them with them on a whole lot
of fronts, and sometimes there isn't always that much in it
for them, but if it makes the system work better,
they're really up for that change.
And they have ideas on what that might look like.
Um, if anything, you know, the, the challenges, how
to respond to all of the good ideas,
whether it's a constraint at our end in terms of our ability
to, to absorb some of those changes
or their ability to put some
of these things in into train quickly. So
Just close, close out for me.
Essentially, you guys are proactively looking at
how you can support that ecosystem with these sort of, uh,
cloud-based, you know,
Integrated systems. Yeah.
Yes. Absolutely.
And it might be worth just, uh, acknowledging we
at least 70% of our transactions come
through our gateway service,
which is our digital kind of channel.
Mm-hmm. So we are, we are quite some way in terms
of the bulk of our interaction comes through software now
through that system, which is part
and parcel why it's a big focus area.
So we're sort of part past the point of no return.
It's, it makes up the volume of our, uh,
interaction system now
and we are just figuring out new ways, I guess,
to make sure the incentives are right for come on board.
Thank you. Okay. Nancy Lou,
Um, very quickly, so it it, when it comes
to debt collection, tax, debt collection, uh,
I know about the penalty side like the UOMI and all those,
but what about any incentives?
And I know we can't really say discounted tax payment,
you can't do that, but are there any smarter ways
to give incentives for companies to proactively,
for example, engaging with their tax agents in a way
so they can get priorities
and getting their curies resolved?
Or what are some of the incentives?
So for companies who are able to pay faster
and upfront who don't get into that psycho
of revolving debt, yeah.
They can take up that offer of and being incentivized. Yeah,
We do actually. I mean, know,
that's why we encourage people if they are in
debt to come and talk to us
because, you know, we, we do have the ability to waive some
of the penalties, uh, in the event that, you know,
that fundamentally the, if the firm is,
is fundamentally viable.
Um, and they're prepared to set up
and stick to a repayment plan.
So, so I keep coming back to, you know,
our legislation requires us to maximize revenue over time.
So that's why we encourage people to come and talk to us.
It's not so much that we have an incentive in the sense
that, um, you know, it, it certainly won't be cheaper
to get yourself into debt
and then, uh, and then come and talk to us.
But, but we can look at, um, finding a,
a halfway point if there is a real sincerity on the other
party and they're able to demonstrate
that in a consistent way.
Uh, that we are, we are, we, and we do have the flexibility
Within the legislation to, to,
you know, try and accommodate
At least part of That.
I think in terms of incentives, the other thing
that we've seen happening in some overseas jurisdictions is
this idea of having kind of a compliance certificate where,
um, taxpayers can actually come to us
and get a bit of a, a piece of paper
that says they're actually up to date in terms of their, um,
G-S-T-P-A-Y-E, et cetera,
which is something we're actually looking
at potentially doing.
It's a bit complicated. All these things are.
Um, but we are working through that at the moment
and that's potentially something we'll be able
to offer in the future that we'll be able to, um, enable
taxpayers to show their creditors, others, banks.
I'm actually doing okay. There's nothing
to worry about in terms of supplying
me with goods or whatever. So, and, and
Roughly what are we looking in terms of timeline
With? Um, we
are looking at that at the moment.
I'm hoping we'll get it done in the next
sort of 12 months at least.
Um, so hopefully we'll be able
to have some answers on that soon.
Yeah. Oh that would be cool. Yeah. Thank you.
Okay. Thank you Nancy. I'm gonna go to
Dr. David Wilson.
Yeah. Um, just following a little bit on, from
what Chloe was talking about, um,
you've got precarious occupation, sole traders
and that sort of thing and
subbies probably fit into this quite a lot.
And um, you a little joke about trying
to understand your provisional tax,
I think is even worse when you get to that level.
And of course got ups and downs.
So, um, if you're paying your provisional tax base on last
year, which was a good year and this year's not so good,
then that gets really tricky and really tricky.
And we are working with estimates
and regardless of which way it goes, the end of the year,
you've gotta balance up, have you underestimated
or overestimated and so on.
And that can be further a problem.
So I guess where I'm going with this is why do we have
to keep working on estimates?
Why can't we work on actuals?
You can you crank an actual plus 105%,
So plus say What? Just
Take last year's and walk by by 1 0 5
Before last year.
This year may not be same. I
know, I know, I know what you mean.
Especially it's that, as Dr. Russell said,
um, last year plus five works pretty well
for stable businesses,
but when you've got volatile income, it's tricky.
Um, and also if you had a bad year last year,
as you said, it's tricky too.
We do have a method in our system which is not very well
utilized called the accounting income method.
Yeah. Because really what you're talking about is instead of
paying your provisional tax based on either an estimate
or what happened last year, why not base it on something
that has just happened?
Yeah. So we try to do that
with this method called the accounting Income method,
which essentially takes your accounting income for the month
and makes a few adjustments,
probably too many adjustments 'cause it gets too complicated.
Um, and you pay based on that. Yep.
Um, the problem we have with it is
we made it too complicated.
Um, and I think, I think there's only about 1800 taxpayers
that use it, that use it.
Okay. So one approach we could think about is
can we simplify that concept?
Um, and you might get greater
Updates the tax agents would be working in different ways,
especially for Yeah, yeah.
Up to date like p Yeah. And
That's all sort of captured in the work
that Peter mentioned earlier where we are looking at
how we can make this easier for small businesses, um,
going forward effectively
because we know it's a real pain point
and we need to find a way through it.
Um, which is why we started off this week,
but we are sort of early days really.
We've still got a bit we'll work to get the exact scope of
what we might do find I'm sure
Find, I'm sure some of your
fintechs would be very happy to.
Sure would. Okay. We're gonna go back th thank you Dave.
We're gonna go back to Dr. Russell.
Uh, just sort of while we're talking deck, I mean
that's all the did from businesses and the like,
but um, uh, just around the working for families debt.
So there's a stat on page 10 of your report that 68%
of working for families, customers who got regular payments
during the year were paid within 20% of what they were owed.
Um, and I know the ongoing problems with working
for families since I was last, didn't they?
Yes. We come up with any better solutions.
No, well, no.
So, so, um, we've,
we've put a discussion document out which looks at some
things to try and reduce that Yeah.
That target range effectively and,
and reduce the number of people finding themselves in debt.
So for example, moving to more frequent,
so quarterly assessment periods
and basing it on, um, the income for that previous quarter.
Um, uh, simplifying some definitions including, um,
you know, uh, doing data exchanges with, uh,
immigration to work out when you know,
when someone is ineligible
to receive it if they've gone overseas, et cetera.
So if, if those were to progress
and they, they're not all straightforward.
Some of them have some, you know, some, some,
inevitably there are some downsides to these things.
But on balance overall, we think
that would reduce the number of people
who would inadvertently find themselves in debt.
Mm-hmm. Now, there are some consequential,
you know, elements to that.
Um, there's a, there you don't have the same certainty
of income over that 12 month period.
And so that might cause some people, for example, to have
to go to, to SD seeking emergency benefits and so on.
So it, it's, it's not a, um, it's not a one-way bet on all
of this, but, you know, we do think
that on balance there's an opportunity there.
We just have to work out how, you know,
can we do it in a way which minimizes some of those other,
um, negative outcomes.
We, we don't stop trying to innovate in ways
to solve the problem.
It's sort of, it goes to
how deeply entrenched this challenge is.
So, um,
each year we experiment ways in which we can estimate
someone's annual income.
'cause obviously we roll over people's entitlement each year
has to be based on what we think
they're gonna earn for that year.
And then they either agree or disagree.
The quality of that calculation can have some bearing on
whether or not people end up in debt.
Because if they don't engage
and they just think, you know, inland revenue knows best,
um, and often they'll end up in debt.
So we've changed that calculation multiple times.
We've put features into our online channels
to try and nudge people.
We've sent them text messages, letters, um,
and you see a real kind of immunity to all of those nudges
and encourage people to notice notify of those changes.
Which is why I think sort of come back to what are some
of the big policy choices that we might have,
because a lot of the other things
that we keep trialing every year don't seem
to get people to change their behavior.
Right. So, Sorry, I mean,
just, it's really interesting.
I I I think this is a fascinating question.
'cause the policy problem you're dealing with working
for families debt is a little bit similar conceptually
to the provisional tax problem.
So with provisional tax, one
of the problems is you're trying to estimate something
that you don't know the answer yet.
It's the same with working for families.
What we do with customers in February, before the,
before the beginning of the year, we say,
what is your income gonna be?
What is your, how many kids will you have in, in that year?
What is your, what
what is your partner situation going to be in this year?
And then we pay you based on that estimate.
So as soon as the year starts, you can just imagine for lots
of people it's wrong straight away.
Yeah. So,
and the the conceptual problem you've got is you're basing a
payment on something that you don't
know the information yet.
So the answer to that problem is what we do
with child support is we base it on last year.
Now you could do that, but that's very inaccurate.
So what what we are really saying is base it on something
that's already happened, but quite recently.
So the quarter before, but, and,
and then you can make the payment certain
and then the person will not,
because what was your situation in the quarter
before, base the payment on that
and it's very, very unlikely to be wrong.
Yep. So that's, that's the issue you're dealing with.
Yeah. Okay. I wanna do tax policy on the go.
No, if, if you were to change it to quarterly Yeah.
So you're gonna have to have people in
contact with you quarterly. Um,
And There, there are
trade offs, that's for sure. Yeah.
Yeah. And a, um, presume
'cause working for families
as an annual entitlement at the moment, so you'd have
to change the legislation. Yes. Correct.
Yeah. You, this is, this would require
legislative change for
Sure. Yeah. Because
you, what you don't wanna do is,
is make the situation worse
by making those Yeah, by moving to courtly.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. Okay. All right.
Um, can I ask a question about your non-tax debt?
So those perennial questions we ask you about the, um, uh,
small business cash flow loan scheme.
Yep. And I know that five years on,
we're seeing big maturity there
and, uh, also student loan, uh, debt up, um,
uh, 6% on 30 June, 2024.
Are you able to talk to those two, uh, non-tax debts?
Sure. So when it comes to the small business, uh,
cash flow scheme, um, obviously a number of those
and they have now come due, um, they, uh,
they're still, you know,
they have five years to pay those debts.
So for those that took a loan out toward the end
of the period, they still have time.
Overall, the base, we loaned out about $2.4 billion in terms
of where we are now.
Uh, we're about close to 70% has repaid.
Uh, we've got 13%, a further 13% are in a payment plan,
and about 17% currently in default.
That doesn't mean that we won't get the money back,
it's just that they, they should have started
their repayments and they haven't.
So we've just kicked off, uh, a program of contacting those,
those parties to draw their attention to the fact that,
that they might wanna have a conversation with us about, um,
either making the payment
or, you know, setting up a repayment plan.
Mm-hmm. So that's where, that's currently
where we are at on the small business loan.
Yeah. And, and student loans.
The student loans. So, um, yeah,
student loans remains a challenge,
but, um, as part of budget 2024,
we received additional funding of $4 million
or 16 million over the forecast period.
Uh, and that's allowed us to resource up our
debt collection activities.
The primary problem is overseas based borrowers,
they make up about 80, 87% of the overall debt.
Uh, and just by having, um,
more resource targeting overseas based borrowers,
we've seen quite a significant uplift in terms
of our debt collection.
So as part of the conditions of that additional funding,
I think our target was to collect an additional 189 million.
Uh, and I think for the year ended, we got up to 243 million
and for this first quarter
and this year we're up to $83 million,
which is about a 40% increase on
how much we collected the quarter in the previous year.
Um, so we are seeing pretty good progress, but
because of the size of the overall debt
and the accumulation of interest, you know, we want
to keep investing in and,
and doing more on that space, we do a lot of work
with third party providers, um,
targeting those overseas customers as sort of a top five set
of countries, predominantly Australia,
where most borrowers are.
We're getting more results out of some
of the information sharing we're doing with, uh,
groups like the A TO trying to progress getting, uh,
income information out of the a TO as well for,
um, overseas based borrowers.
We think that would be quite helpful.
A lot of our campaigns are, are proving to be successful,
so we think we're on the cusp of being able
to turn some of that around.
Domestically, things are still pretty stable.
Uh, the problem largely seems to be with those overseas,
overseas based borrowers
and some of the providers we use, uh,
for different countries, whether it's uk, Germany,
places like that, um, that we're in conversations
with them about different capabilities that they have
to extend our reach and improve our results,
but we're seeing more progress and pretty good results.
Um, what,
What about, um, capturing them at the border?
Is that, is that perceived or real?
It's real, it's Real's. 40. And what does it look like?
What does it look like for our, our viewing audience?
So we've had, not that we want give all, not
that we wanna give, not that we want, give you tricks away,
but honestly, what does that look like?
Straight Had, uh, two recent arrests. Yes.
Uh, one from a person from Neway
and another person from Australia, uh, with a,
I think the first debt was over $107,000.
Um, and we arrested that person and
after two weeks came to an arrangement
and they were, uh, released and free to go.
Uh, similar story with the Australian base borrower.
Um, both provided significant lump sum payments
and entered into repayment arrangements.
Um, we do have a number of people
that we're monitoring in terms of if they cross the border,
then we will assume an arrest warrant
still remains a last resort.
But often, um, you know, just the act
of issuing an arrest warrant will bring people to the table
and, and settle up to some extent.
So, um, we're active in that space.
The, the quality and the volume
of information sharing is improving all the time.
And that, that will just enhance our ability to take
that option if required.
Mm-hmm. We certainly see it as a high cost last effort,
uh, approach just given, uh, how much effort has
to go into making it a reality. Okay.
Interesting. Uh, Dan, did you have a, um, yeah,
thanks sub Dan, but what,
Just on the, um, student loan is there, I mean, continues
to grow the value of debt.
Is there any forecast that show, um, you know, that,
um, it plateauing
or that the more money you guys collect in versus the, um,
incremental increase in the debt?
Or is it just gonna infinitely grow? It,
It, it is a long term problem, uh,
and we are exploring options around whether
or not the settings arrive.
Um, what we're starting to see is over time, um,
just given the, the overall size of the base
and the rates, um, you know, we, we may never catch up.
Um, so we're looking at, uh, different options.
We don't have the same toolkit when it comes
to student loan debt as we do other, um,
taxes that we administer.
So having a bit more flexibility around being able
to get rid of, uh, debts
that we know we're just not gonna be able to gather.
And if you look at the predominant, um, population
of overseas based borrowers, these are people
that are now in their forties, fifties,
took out the loan a long, long time ago,
have never been back in the country,
hard, hard to track down.
Um, so our inability to write off some of that debt
that we know is not gonna be collected, uh,
I think is a problem against
that growing kind of trajectory.
So we are looking at different options
to see whether we can, uh, put some more tools, can,
could sell some of it potentially,
but I, I guess we already work with third parties in
Some Yeah.
Another couple us sub. So back,
back on these small business loan scheme.
So you, you've got about 30%, um, still to be repaid,
roughly 700 million.
Do we have an estimate, um, for bad debt
or write offs? Is there, is there,
So currently we've written off about 2%, so it's about
for whatever that is, um, 500 million is it?
Or is it less than that? 2%? 20, 50 million?
Uh, so we've written off about 50 million at the stage.
It's quite early still, of course, because, um,
and so that yeah, that primarily reflects businesses
that have actually gone into liquidation
or, uh, in that intervening period.
So, um, you know, some portion of the debt
that is in default is likely to,
you know, not be recoverable.
But at this point, you know,
we don't know what that looks like. Yeah.
And, um, any, any anecdotal feedback about, um,
from businesses about, you know, in hindsight,
would they have taken the loans?
Because I, you know, I've had feedback locally
that actually had they have known
how difficult it would be to pay back.
Yeah. They wouldn't have taken on.
Have you, has ID got any kind of aggregate information on,
um, you know, yeah.
In hindsight, would they have
actually taken on the loans or,
I don't know if we have anything on that.
I mean, I, I think the, the fact that you've had, you know,
almost 70% at 68
or something like that, percent who repaint it, uh, I,
I think, you know, it's a very positive thing.
I, I think at an individual business level,
if you think about the nature of the uncertainty, many
of them faced at the point at which
they came in and sought the funding.
You know, I imagine there are some of them
who got the funding
and actually in retrospect, probably didn't need it.
But if you think about what it was like at that time
and the high degree of uncertainty
and the high, um,
the di difficulty they may have faced in finding cash from
elsewhere, you can sort
of understand why people took advantage of it.
So I, I'm actually, I think the, the,
the overall repayment rate is, is pretty good given
where we are and given the timeframe since the loans
were originally taken out.
So we'll be, you know, we, as I say, we've just started now
to crank up that process of getting in touch with 'em.
So we'll be much better placed in a year
to get a bit better sense for, uh, whether or not,
and how much of this might no longer be collectible. Yeah.
Thank you. So they were
interest free for what, the first
Two years? Correct. And then
3% and then when they get to maturity,
Uh, there is, they do get, uh,
penalty interest gets applied if they go
once they go into default. Okay.
Right. We're gonna go back to close.
Yeah. If a series of questions on student loans.
So if that's Yep. Yep. Let's do that. Cool.
All right, sweet. So, um, I guess just to your point earlier
around, um, how the majority
of those overseas borrowers are 40 to 50, uh,
we're obviously seeing quite a trend
of young people currently leaving the country.
And um, and we've also had that met
with obviously the government decisions per the budget,
which increase the, um, uh, interest
for overseas borrowers as well.
I guess just from that information of the exodus
of young New Zealanders and the increased cost
of being an overseas borrower with the, um,
increases in the interest rates per the government, uh,
budget decisions, what does that tell,
are you doing any forecasting
or projections on what that means in terms of these figures?
Uh, not so much. Maybe others know about forecast in terms
of long term outcomes,
but we are tuned into the fact that we want to get
to those people early so they don't end up in the same
situation as some of those former borrowers.
So we do, we're doing a lot more work to make sure
that people know what they need
to do when they leave the country.
Uh, and we're doing a lot more
to target those people overseas early.
Mm-hmm. Because we recognize much like all of our debts,
the older it gets, the harder it is to collect.
Mm-hmm. The bigger the likelihood is that people will kind
of bury their head in the sand.
So, uh, from a kind of an education prevention point
of view, we are, we're very much dialed into that,
but I'm not sure about the long term forecasting.
And in terms of your question around forecast, kind
Of two things. First
is, uh, if you can forecast
or foresee any changes to the demographic breakdown of, um,
who those overseas borrowers are that you need to get
that money back from, uh,
and secondly what the potential size of
that offshore debt may be as a result
of Friends of People. So
The For Forecast are actually done is just checking out.
They're actually done by the Ministry of Education. Okay.
Um, so we were, you know, we will, we,
we calculate the value of the loan
that is owed to us at that point.
Mm-hmm. Um, so, um,
I probably can't answer too much in terms
of the detail you're asking.
Mm-hmm. Um, I think the, um, what we are doing now is trying
to be more proactive in reminding people if we become aware
that they, uh, you know, might be going overseas,
reminding them of their obligations
and encouraging them to set up the appropriate
arrangements and so on.
Okay. Yeah. And also, I guess, uh, this new generation,
those not being in their forties
and fifties are also probably in a far more unfortunate
situation if they're trying to avoid, given the fact
that you are now starting to enter into some arrangements
with, uh, these third parties.
Like is it Info Log?
Yep. Yeah. Could you just outline
for the committee your relationship with Info Log?
Um, so I think we, we use groups like Info Log, really
for track and trace activities.
So trying to locate people, finding a contact address
or contact details so we can get in touch.
When you say you use groups like Info
Log, who else do you use?
Uh, so I don't have the other providers, but there's two
or three providers there.
Um, could we just as a matter of committee follow up,
get those, um, I mean, you'll be aware of the fact
that a few months ago the alarm was, sounded,
at least in some commentary about working with the likes
of Info Log, uh, and some of the privacy concerns,
particularly using a private company, um, to kind
of get this information.
Uh, have you changed anything since those concerns were,
My understanding is when those concerns came up,
we did an assessment to look at the scope of
what we are asking them to do.
And the scope of what we asked them to do is separate
to some of those concerns that have been raised.
And so there wasn't, uh, a worry
that we'd had similar exposure.
Could you elaborate on that?
'cause the concerns as I understand them, are kind
of biometric data, data mining and a range. Yeah.
So we're not using them for those services.
Yeah. Okay. And, and we don't
share that information with them.
So, you know, we, we'll, we'll have a name, uh,
and potentially a previous contact
address or something like that.
And what, and we will often, uh, have a sense for
what country they might be in,
but we've lost contact with 'em.
And so the question will be, can you identify
and find this person may include their
date of birth and those sorts of things.
Okay. Would you be able to share
with the committee following this hearing?
Sure. Um, just that information in terms of that assessment.
Sure. Yeah. Um, have you engaged at all
with Fin Cap on their concerns about the use
of these third party providers?
I don't know. Don't, can I don't dunno,
Answer if you'd be also able to Sure.
Offer us some. Yeah.
At the, um, are you aware of fintech's concerns
with these third party providers?
I wasn't, no. Okay. I would also suggest looking at
those We'll, and responding to
that as a matter of follow up.
Yeah. Thank you. Okay.
We've probably had enough of, for the time being on debt,
whether it be tax debt or non-tax debt.
We're gonna go to Dr. Russ to move us along.
Okay. Um, thank you.
Actually, um, something I would like to get an update on,
um, is just the business transformation.
So I think the program officially ended,
ended about three years ago.
Yes, that's right. Something like that.
Um, and we haven't seen you in the course of this parliament
for a long term and for, um, an extended briefing.
So it'd be quite good to just get an update on how
that has worked out for the organization.
What value. It's, I mean, I know it's adding a lot.
I just wanna and address this on, um,
page seven of your written answers.
So it's written answer question two, um,
which is the staffing levels of ir.
And I just note that, um, uh, you know, one
of the promises of business transformation was
that need fewer staff that, that seems to turn out
to have not quite been the case,
but I still appreciate that it's actually
been a very successful program.
You just unpack that a little bit. Sure,
Sure. Yeah. Uh, so,
um, you're right.
The, the program offic officially finished, um, in,
at the end of June, 2022.
Yeah. Um, I think
by almost any measure you would say it was successful, uh,
you know, it, it did come in under budget.
Uh, um, I mentioned that one of the, um,
objectives it had was
to reduce compliance costs for small businesses.
It didn't achieve that, but all on pretty much every other
measure it did achieve both reductions in, uh,
compliance costs and an,
and an increase in voluntary compliance.
Effectively, particularly if you think about individuals,
we now issue about 3.6 million individual, uh,
personal assessments, and only about 15% of, uh,
those people have to reengage with us to make a correction.
Uh, as part
of the business transformation, uh, you are right.
The, uh, staffing levels were, were reduced.
Um, it's, it's not quite on this chart.
If you go back, I think it's two years, um,
I don't remember the exact number,
but it was about 6,000 staff.
I'm just gonna check that. I think it was just
under 6,000 staff.
Uh, and that was reduced down to about three
and a half thousand as that was the,
that was the undertaking as part
of the business transformation.
Um, since that time, uh, you know, I,
I came in the day after the transformation.
I guess my, my judgment, um, was that, and,
and it gives, you'll appreciate the, the, um, assessment of
how much people you could take out was done
very early in the process.
My judgment was probably, it was,
it was probably a bit sharp.
Uh, they'd probably taken a little bit much out.
Um, but look, since that time, you know, we've been able to
re uh, re reassign some of our own funding.
And of course we've had a couple of injections with a focus
specifically on compliance.
Not all of that has gone into people obviously,
but, um, as you would've got a sense, uh,
when Lisa was talking about our interactions, often,
particularly when it comes to a debt
or a difficult conversation, talking
to an individual has a very powerful, um, response.
So our numbers have come back up as a result of those,
those, um, increases in baseline funding for compliance.
So, um, without, without the transformation,
we spent a long time either on talking about the ecosystem
and the way in which our systems engage with other systems.
We would not be in
that situation if we hadn't done what we had done.
Uh, talking to counterparts
and other jurisdictions, you know, many of them are
facing the, the problems we had 10 years ago
and are struggling to find their way out the other side.
So I think, you know,
in many ways we are very fortunate in terms
of when it was done, and it's moved us off
what was effectively a mainframe using old,
both old technology and old terminology.
Um, and so our, our new system, you know, is,
is much more responsive
and, uh, you know, when it, when it comes
to putting in place changes in government policy,
for example, um, pretation as you'll recall,
you know, any, uh, it, it used to take 18 months of testing,
so it would usually take about two years to make a,
a significant change for that reason.
Now, we can now do these things in three months.
Often, often the problem is not our end.
It's with our ecosystem partners
and ensuring they have sufficient time to do the changes,
do the testing and roll it out.
Yeah, I, I do recall that when I first arrived at IR
to work there, I was told
that the system was held together with OT
Taping. Yes,
yes. Pretty much
So. The transformation's
very much
Worth it. Yeah. I mean,
literally they were buying, uh, computer,
computer sets off eBay because they weren't made.
And so that tells you something about how, how, um,
what a great job they did in moving off it actually. Uh,
Yeah. Yeah. And
I think, so I'm really interested in that.
Um, you, you've alluded to it a couple of times
with small businesses and micro businesses
and the compliance costs that they face.
Um, and, um, I appreciate the work you are doing to try
to find a way to make it easier nevertheless, um, in terms
of tax compliance here in New Zealand
to other jurisdictions, out of those small
and micro business compare in terms of compliance cost
to jurisdictions Yeah.
Elsewhere. Do you know, do you have a feel for that?
I don't know that I, uh, dunno
if anyone on the table knows.
I mean, certainly, uh, in talking to other jurisdictions
around their debt, for example,
everyone says the major issues are with small businesses.
Yeah. Right. So, um, uh,
and obviously every country has different, um,
that they're both their construct and the social license
and, and tax morale is quite different.
But, um, that particular segment seems
to be the segment which is most vulnerable, I guess,
to finding themselves in debt.
Yeah. I, I get the debt point,
but I, I also want to talk just the compliance council
In general. Yeah.
Do you have a all I dunno,
I think we can come back to you on that.
Yeah, it's a good question. Further information on that one.
Yeah. Yeah. Thank you.
That'd be interesting because I, I,
my my understanding has always been
that our tax compliance burden has actually not
that bad, but Yeah.
Yeah. But I suspect that's right. I think that's right.
But, but even quite good. Yeah.
But we, but we can do better,
I think is we were is where we think we are at. We
Can always do better. Yeah. Yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Okay.
Todd Stevens, Did you, well just, yeah,
just obviously you touched on the, uh,
transformation project.
So basically now you've got this great technology backbone.
Mm-hmm. Yeah. Just keen to know Yeah.
Uh, in the last year or even going forward, I suppose. Yeah.
How are you, I'm assuming you now use AI over this
technology black backbone.
So a few questions. What are you doing in that space? Yeah.
But also importantly, like
what governance have you got around ai?
Yeah. And also are you providing, um, any advice
to other agencies across government too, in relation
to technology and ai?
So, um, I, I think firstly we would say one
of the opportunities we have ahead of us is
to make even better use of what, of, of the great sort
of system and platform and data we have.
I, I think we've yet to optimize that going forward
when it comes to ai.
Um, so we've been using AI for a number of years, uh,
particularly in its earlier manifestations,
like machine learning when it comes to generative ai.
Uh, it presents a great opportunity,
but also carries some very big risks with it.
And so we have put formal governance around it, um, uh,
to ensure that, uh, we are, we, we are,
we are thoughtful about what we do and how we do it.
So to give you some concrete examples and,
and, uh, when it comes to ai, um,
we will always test it in a safe environment first look and,
and, and identify firstly whether, whether it can work.
And secondly, whether on the face of it, it looks like
it'll give you better outcomes, then you look at whether
or not you can scale it
and whether you would still likely get the better outcomes.
And only then do you look to put it, put it in production.
An example of where we have put it in production is in our
call center, where we have an ai, a generative ai,
which essentially does a call summarization.
What we found putting that, um, product in place, uh, is
that it's generated about a 17% performance improvement,
productivity improvement in the post call time it takes
for one of our staff to, you know,
capture the, the content of the call.
Um, so, uh, there are, we, we've also,
for example, just, we're just starting
to roll out Microsoft 3 6 5 co-pilot.
So co-pilot's been out for a while.
Microsoft 3 6 5 is much more powerful.
But the reason, you know, we,
we've been looking at it is it's actually embedded within
your Microsoft products.
Mm-hmm. Uh,
and it can be used in that sealed environment.
So, uh, I think the important thing though, with all
of our ai, um, progress, is to make sure
that we bring our staff with us,
because ultimately, this is only as good
as the staff who are using it.
You know, you have you, the, the way in which you query it
and ask it questions and, and, and use it matters.
That's how you generate the benefit.
The second thing is, um, uh, we are looking,
we, we've, we've shared quite a lot of what we've been doing
with our colleague agencies and with the GCDO, um, partly
because of the fortunate position we found ourselves in
post transformation.
We are well prepared to be able to take advantage
of some of this technology.
Uh, and we have some really good people
who understand both the opportunity within our world,
but also the importance within our world of retaining,
you know, confidentiality of tax information and so on.
So bringing all that together, I think means we are
well positioned to provide some
leadership within the public service.
So we are sharing both, you know, what we're doing by way
of governance, what we're doing by way of training.
We developed some training modules, which we've shared.
Um, we did that, um,
when we first rolled out access to copilot.
We're doing it again with Microsoft Copilot 3 6 5.
Um, we're also, for example, supporting AI rollout
with specific case studies.
So if you're in a particular part
of our business when you get access,
but when you get the training, part of
that training will include in your area, this is
how you could think about using it.
This is, and this is, um, some case studies.
And only once you've completed the
training do you get to use it.
So there are, I don't know how many, um, uh,
in the sand pit at the moment.
We've got a whole range of
AI products that we're looking at.
I think the other thing I'd, I'd say too is just
as we are looking to deploy it, um, you know,
there are other parties outside who are legitimately
using it to gather tax information.
So one of the things we've been very conscious
of is the need for us to, uh, update
and ensure that our public facing information that's on the,
that it's on a, a website is accurate.
So that if someone's using an ai, uh, machine
to gather information, they're gathering a, you know,
a, a truthful source.
And then of course you've got malicious actors.
And so we have to be mindful about
how AI might be being used to either come at us directly,
uh, or, or come at our partners, or come at our customers.
So we're sort of trying to come at it from all three
of those angles to ensure that we make the most
of the opportunity while keeping, um, taxpayers just a
Quick supplementary then.
Yeah. Um, and so, yeah, just,
and just to kind of then bring up in an,
we'll tie together a thread from an earlier conversation
when we were talking about provisional tax,
and I'm just gonna use Xero as an example for a second,
but obviously they now within Xero
that she has AI functions, which
I'm, I haven't actually tried it.
My, I haven't, I haven't actually tried it.
I'm assuming it could actually then produce
possibly a provisional tax.
Yeah. So again, are you talking
to our vendors again about Yes.
Again, 'cause that could bridge some
of these problems we identified earlier. We're
Doing, we're talking quite a lot to vendors about, about,
uh, ai, the opportunities.
What we're finding is, um, both a lot of the products
that we use ourselves, a lot of software, uh, all
of a sudden, uh, day, you know, day one, it's not there.
Day two, AI is all of a sudden enabled.
Uh, so that's the first thing.
Uh, secondly, uh, we want to, we want to be confident
that if a third party, particularly a third party that is,
um, sharing information with us, if they're using ai,
that they're aware of the nature of what, you know,
what information they're accessing
and ensuring that it is, it remains confidential and safe.
So, I mean, it, it, it's a very fast moving space as,
as you'll appreciate, um,
but we are very conscious of wanting the system
to be able to take advantage of it.
So we are, we're engaging quite closely with those.
I mean, again, just one, I guess one comment from me would
be too, is I think probably across government,
you just said you can now,
you can now update your systems much faster.
You're probably now one of the lead Yeah.
Departments or agencies.
So I think you've probably got a leadership role. Yeah.
And 'cause we actually do need government to be faster
and embracing these technologies in a
safe and responsible way. Yeah. Because otherwise
You can't afford to be left behind in this.
Yes. Um, and, and, and it is changing very fast. Yeah.
Yeah. Thank you. Okay, Dan,
Thanks very much. Um, that sounds
exciting.
I guess I'm cu curious on your assessment of, um,
the productivity uplift from ai.
Because, I mean, um, I have seen you,
you've had a 3% increase in your workforce year on year.
I understand your, you know, the importance of touch,
you know, physical people.
Yeah. But, uh, ultimately one would hope
that the investment in AI means
that you can do even more with less Yeah.
Head counts. Yeah. What's your assessment
of the medium term outlook for headcount
and the uplift of productivity
From? So ai,
I, we, we haven't, we haven't done a sort of a
forward assessment of the numbers in that sense,
but you're absolutely right.
Um, uh, the, one of the reasons we invest in AI is
to improve productivity.
And, uh, I think one of the lessons when you look at, uh,
internationally, uh, is that it has the opportunity
to drive out productivity.
Um, but don't jump too quickly.
There have been instances, uh, offshore
where they've taken people out
and then have found they've needed to put them back in.
So I think our, our approach is much more, uh,
as I mentioned earlier,
we wanna be confident it will generate a productivity gain.
Once it's in production, then it's the opportunity
to work out what that productivity gain is.
And, and we do need to take it out effectively
because we have to find at least 3% per annum cost savings
to deliver, to meet our cost pressures.
So that can largely be done through attrition
and some of those things, which is
our preferred way of doing it.
There will be some targeted changes where we need to.
I think the other thing is it's, um, it's not,
it's very difficult to look at a single AI product
and then say, so that's the productivity.
We'll get out of it. Another good example is I mentioned
the, um, what we've deployed in the call center
or in, in that space for call summarization.
Now, at the same time, we've also deployed, um, uh,
IOP, what does that stand for?
Integrated operational planet, one
of those integrated operational planet,
which essentially enables us to optimize both,
um, how much effort we put into different products like
emails or, or web messages.
How we optimize our people against those,
including the particular skills
and preferences of our, of our people.
Now, we've deployed that in the expectation that
that too will drive out, um,
operational efficiencies over time.
So, uh, you know, the, without these investments,
I think, you know, you would struggle to work out
how you could continue to deliver a given level of,
of performance without, um,
while meeting your cost pressures.
But I think that's, you know, that's why we have an ongoing
program of these investments.
And, and we are, you know, closely monitoring
the ways in which we are getting productivity improvements.
So I mentioned, for example, um, helping people
with case studies about
how you could use it in your particular area.
And as we get new case study ideas, actually sharing
that across those groups.
So trying to spread best practice as best we can.
Yeah. We look forward to hearing more updates
on future reviews.
Thank you. Okay. So Nancy Lou, um,
so really interesting to hear the future
Perspectives about, for example, doing the copilot
and sharing the case studies.
That's all great. And I think we will get better.
My concern, and my question is around everybody kind
of developing their own in-house, this is what I'm gonna do,
my kind of ai and then a lot of your stakeholders,
for example, um, the, the big fours,
the medium accounting firms, the smaller accounting firms,
they kinda all have, they either buy off the
shelf or develop their own.
Then eventually nobody's talking to each other in a way.
And you spend a lot of time trying
to get the system to talk to the system.
Don't really relate to together.
It, it kind of go back to
when accounting first moved from the trial balance on paper.
That's how I learned my accounting Yeah. That day.
Um, and, and none
of the younger accountants now know the trial
balance in that T form.
Yeah. However, because there were so many, um,
accounting packages that developed through the period
that actually reduced efficiency
and productivity between the stakeholders and firms.
What is your approach then,
when you're developing your in-house ai?
How are you bringing stakeholders on board?
So, so two responses in there.
The first is, uh, we aren't developing our own AI products.
What we are doing is, these are all products
that are off the shelf, but what we want to do is test them
to make sure a, they can work safely in our environment.
So, so for example, most of the AI that we'll all be using,
uh, copilots on our phones
or whatever, is searching the, the internet for a lot of
what we will want to do.
We don't want it to go to the internet.
We want it to look internally into our systems.
And so, and,
and we can't afford that information to go to the internet.
So to put a crudely, if you're using copilot, uh,
and you put a document into it
and ask it to summarize it,
that document is now accessible to anyone in the world.
We can't afford to do that with our data.
So we are taking an off the shelf product,
but testing it within our environment.
Okay. That's the first sort of block.
And then the second block will be those AI products
that can actually work across parties.
But again, uh, all of those are off the shelf products,
whether it's Adobe, Microsoft,
or whoever's, whoever's producing them.
Uh, our, the provider of our primary system, um,
fast, the, the Gentech system, they,
they will be introducing a,
do introduce AI components into that.
And again, we do the same thing.
We need to test to make sure
that it can operate environment in our environment,
but then it's just turning it on.
You also raised another question though, which is, um, we,
which not only we are turning our minds to,
but I think a lot of the, the big four
and those that are really heavily using AI now, uh, is
how to train people.
Um, you know, we, we are talking about, you know,
it's very clear that we need to train our people to become,
uh, more, more digitally dextrous
and able to use these products.
But in two or three years time, um, you know,
ministerial draft letters will be first drafted by an ai,
uh, reports to select committees will be drafted by an ai.
So how do we teach the new grads what it's like,
what does a good report look like?
Now, maybe they won't need to know,
'cause AI's gonna tell 'em.
But, um, in talking to some of the firms that are starting
to use this technology to get rid of sort of both the,
the more mundane parts of the, of what they do,
but frankly, also some of the things
that we're training exercises for people,
it is leaving a bit of a golf, um, you know,
how do people build up ex build up experience, um,
to enable 'em to, um, critically assess ai, which is,
you know, in a world where some
of those experiences are no longer as available.
So that's a, it's sort of a future problem,
but one we're starting to turn our minds to.
'cause it's gonna hit us faster than we all think. Yeah.
And, and precisely
because it's going to hit us faster than we think.
What about your future workforce?
Your workforce will also need to be able to have
that critical thinking Yeah.
Um, to be able to train the ai,
but also to train the next generation. Yeah. To be able
To Absolutely. And,
and in, and in many ways,
our current workforce is the best place to start with that.
So, which is why we are really keen
to bring them on this journey.
If we can, um, educate them
and get them comfortable with learning these new tools, uh,
they will become the best trainers we
will have for the future.
And if you, you know, I'm certainly old enough to remember,
uh, computers coming into our workplaces.
You don't have to answer that.
Uh, but you know, it, it was pretty frightening, uh,
initially, and those of us who had to use dos,
it was even more frightening.
But we, we all went on that journey and eventually learnt
and got comfortable with it.
And I think, you know, that
that's the best way we can do this.
If we rely only on the new generations coming through
for whom, you know,
AI has always been at the end of their thumb.
Um, we are gonna find ourselves, I think, with a, with a,
a struggle in terms of maintaining the sort
of performance we're looking for.
Okay. Thank you. Mm-hmm. Thank you.
And when I came into Parliament as a young staffer in 1998,
the first question was, uh, have you used email before?
Because we can give you lessons.
If not, it's this new thing.
And it's not that it's not that
Long to go, I probably need to refresh it.
Yeah. Yeah. Okay. Now, uh, Dr. Wilson.
Okay. Look, uh, um, first of all, uh, compliments
for grasping the AI challenge
and, um, all the dot points I had down here about
what you're doing, and you've got good governance,
you're testing it, you're scaling it, um,
you're looking at the
outcomes, you're increasing productivity.
All these things are fabulous.
Also, the discussion around platforms. Mm-hmm.
You know, really interesting discussion.
One of the things that's come out of, um, speaking to people
that have been down this path as well is that the, you know,
the best outcomes we can get from AI
is asking the right questions.
Mm-hmm. And the prompts. And so, you know,
your critical thinking comes in there.
Um, so I'm really pleased that you are on, on that journey.
Um, and also in terms of this discussion between, um,
headcount and a IR we replacing jobs generally
industry are telling us that
actually that's not the outcome.
The outcome is better service, better productivity,
better innovation from your existing staff.
And, and that's kind of the goal. Yeah.
So look, congratulations on all of that.
Um, the question I'm gonna ask is
that you are building a whole lot of information
through the ability of those platforms.
How are you, or even have you gone there yet in terms
of looking at the kinds of suspicious activities
and transactions that may be happening within your cohort so
that you can look
to address organized crime and the like? Yeah.
Yeah. So, um, two parts to that answer.
I think, um, as a general rule, I think we feel
we could use our data much better to help us, uh,
on a number of, in a number of areas
of targeting our effort.
And so we've actually made some changes, uh,
internally in terms of the way we're organized, uh,
and, uh, are looking at how we make, how we
link the opportunity for data, true data analysis and,
and insight, including using ai, uh,
to help better target frontline.
Um, having said that, we are, we already do some of this.
So for example, um, uh, we have a, um,
in something called we call Integrity
Checker, is that the right name?
Integrity Manager. Integrity Manager.
So, so this is a, I'm getting there.
This is, this is a, you can tell I'm a child of the sixties.
This is a, um, no tool.
This is a tool that effectively, um, tests each GST return
as it comes in pretty much in real time
and looks at the GST return
and compares it to a whole lot of other information.
And out of that process, this, this, uh, manager can,
in form of view about the likelihood about whether
this is a sound, uh, um,
normal transaction, transaction or not.
So of the, um, I can't remember
what percentage it spits out.
2%. 2%, yeah. Yeah.
The 2%, it's identifies that, uh,
have some questions get referred to a human,
and about half of those we would find are problematic.
The other 98%, we have a very high degree of confidence
that it meets that it, that it's a reasonable, um, claim.
So we're already using, uh, tools such as that
to basically, um, help to weed out,
um, you know, uh, things that look a bit unusual.
I won't go into detail, uh, on how we are using some
of these tools, for example, in the organized crime space.
Uh, in part because some of, some of
what we're doing is trialing some things.
Um, but what I can say is, um, from what I've seen,
the ability to identify, if you like,
complex connections that a human probably would never see,
or if they did, it would take them many weeks, if not months
to identify, can be done very quickly.
And so that enables us to identify whether it's transactions
or individuals who, who would
otherwise perhaps, um, you know, we wouldn't get visibility
of that, to be fair.
Uh, many of them would not be using the tax system,
but, you know, nonetheless that is true.
Uh, yeah. Okay. Thank you Dr. Russell.
Oh, another start at 10, another
Reset Dr.
Um, family Boost. Yeah.
Um, so just looking, uh, it's in the, your
written questions, it's question number 25.
Um, and on page 38, thank you.
So family boost, um, in the budget,
twenty twenty four, twenty five, a hundred thirty 1 million
was Allocate for Family Boost.
Um, the actual spend was 51 million. Yeah.
What happened to the other 80 million?
So, um, it got transferred,
I dunno if all of it got transferred.
A, a large component of it got
transferred to the following year.
Now part of that was because
of an accounting treatment change.
Oh yeah. So, um, a decision was made
and the accountants made a decision that the appropriate way
to account for this was, uh, when the payment was made.
So if you recall, um, in the first year, uh,
was it three quarters or four quarters?
Three, uh,
I might get can you, can you explain this?
'cause it was something, it's, it's something about when we
accrue as opposed to American gimme
A journal entry. 'cause I can do things in journal.
Oh, okay. You one step ahead of me, I can't do very well,
well journal entry accounting, but,
but essentially it was, we had been,
we had been accruing it for the quarter Right.
And then making the payment, the decision was that accruing
for the quarter was an appropriate,
and we should take it from when we met
when we paid the claim.
So that meant that, um, for that we,
there were three quarters in the year the first quarter,
and then we paid it and we paid for the first quarter.
In the second quarter. Yeah.
The same happened in the sec in the second quarter. Yeah.
By the time we get to the third quarter.
Whereas we had been accruing it to,
to be paid in the 24, 25 year.
Yeah. The appropriate accounting treatment was for
that third, that final quarter of the year
to actually be paid the following year.
So part of it was a transfer
of funding into the, into the following year.
So part of it was a transfer of funding.
It was still a, a massive underspend. Yeah.
So, and so part of that was, um, uh, the,
as you'll be aware that the estimated
that the take up rates were less than we had originally
forecast and the, the payment amounts were
less than originally forecast.
So that made up the remainder so that also the residual of
that got transferred over as well.
Once the changes in the policy were made by the government,
which increased both the numbers of Elig eligible families
and the amount of payments.
So in the 20, 24, 25 year. Yep.
Um, have you been able to identify
how many families actually got the full $250 entitlement
that was promised in the budget?
Yes. Do we have that handy?
The 250, we got the maximum, um, amount paid.
So a maximum amount of family boost paid.
'cause the budget promise was a combination of Family Boost
and our
Tax cuts. So 9 75
per quarter, is that what you're
Referring to? Yeah, that's the, that
Well that was the,
that was the family boost, but budget,
Yeah. No,
You got It. Yep. Yeah.
So we've got the 9 75 figure,
but we don't have the two, the, the figure you are talking.
So we still, are you gonna try to find a family
that actually got the full two 50? I'm
Serious. Try to find a family. Um,
But I think, was that a combination
of things though, that wasn't just
Yeah, it was, but you know, that was,
it was the budget, if it's
A combination And it was gonna be
delivered by Inland revenue. So
I think, um, identifying where there's a combination
of receipts to give an outcome is very hard for us.
I'm, I'm not even sure we can do that.
So it's not that we don't want to, I'm just not sure we can,
'cause what you're saying is, can we,
can we unpick the amounts back
and attribute, you know, the family boost payment is,
is relatively straightforward,
but it's the other component
that would be much more problematic.
So do you have an understanding on
how many families might have missed out on Family Boost?
Um, you know, the settings got changed.
Uh, You had to do any counterfactual analysis there
Or No, we haven't gone, gone back. Okay.
No, But I mean,
at the moment we're sitting at about 98,000 registrations.
Yeah. Uh, post those changes
the most recent quarter under those new settings, um,
the average claim amount's gone up to 6 28 from 360 2.
Yeah. We had about 56,000, uh, families
received claims, and of that about nine
and a half thousand were paid to newly eligible households.
So I think over time, as we move into subsequent quarters,
under the new settings, we might be able to kind
of retrospectively get a better handle on it.
'cause there's still a good portion of people
that haven't been able to make claims
'cause they still haven't filed tax returns, for example.
Mm-hmm. So they, that that number will keep changing. Right.
Uh, and I guess in the first quarter
of some new settings as well, because
They have four years to claim. Mm-hmm.
Yep. No, I appreciate there's a,
there's a delay in planning mean
that relies on people actually hanging onto their invoice.
Yeah. And it's also very hard for us to, um,
to assess even what the,
what's the potential population here.
'cause we just don't have full enough information.
We've made an estimate, but it is literally
that it's an estimate.
Yeah. We're not able to pin it down. We just don't have,
I appreciate it's a bit better than
sticking your finger in the air. Marginally
Better. Yeah. Okay.
Um, do you,
have you done any ethnicity analysis
of who's receiving working fa Sorry, family boost?
No, we haven't done, 'cause we don't hold, we don't hold
Ethnicity. Yeah. Um,
so that makes that problematic.
But we just completed a, a, a survey of five
and a half thousand, uh, family members customers just
to see how they've found the experience.
Yep. Uh, and that's been largely positive.
So we've had, uh, the vast majority, I think 85% said
that the claim process was easy. Uh,
Sorry, but this is people who actually received it.
Yes. Okay. So there's a bias straight away there. Yes.
Yeah. I'm just saying we,
so we've done research in that specific,
Which comes back to that point.
We don't actually know the unknown population. Yeah.
So one of our deep concerns is
that this particular policy, um, is not going
to reach our Pacifica or Maori families.
And we're trying to get a handle on that,
but it doesn't seem that we can collect any
data around that.
Could you do it through your survey?
If you ask that ethnicity question,
We potentially could ask for sort information Sure.
To go to a population outside of the existing customer
Face the same problem you've identified? Well,
No, because you'll be able to get a, um, you'll be able
to get an estimate, a population wide estimate from states
New Zealand of the number of families
with preschool children and the ethnicity breakdown of that.
So you'd be able to at least get some high level comparisons
between who's getting family boosts
and what the general population is.
Yeah. But if we were, I think
what you're asking is could we use our survey
to form a view about what's the
overall eth Ethnic Ethnic And you,
And you'd have to ask an ethnicity question.
We'd have ask an ethnicity question.
We'd also probably have to change the sample size
because the purpose of this was more about, um, trying
to understand any issues, um, people had with receiving it.
Whereas your, I I think your question is more about,
you know, what can we draw about the population?
Yeah. I suspect would have
to have quite a significantly bigger sample size
to give us an outcome like that.
Having said that, we are, you know, we,
we have spent quite a lot of time, um, in outreach programs
with the Pacifica and Maori communities, um, to try
and ensure that, you know, there's visibility of an access
to the scheme as well.
So, you know, um, we,
our people on the ground had actually been going out
to the childhood centers and those
sorts of things to try and encourage it.
I appreciate that you have been doing the work, um,
as again, it's just as it's really hard
to assess the outcome of that.
Yeah. And so they, and to, uh, for every family
that gets money in its back pocket is gonna be very
pleased about that.
Um, uh, but what we're not, what we can't get hold
of is the families are not getting the money.
Yeah. And even though they're entitled to it.
Um, and I, I can see my concern there is
that that might, yeah.
Um, there might be an s component there.
I I've said Maori and,
but I bet my bottom dollar that there are,
are families in our immigrant communities
who are not getting it because they don't have the language
skills to claim and
Things like that.
But, you know, a a again, it, we, we don't tend to, um,
I don't think for any of our current products,
we collect ethnicity data.
Um, and,
and in part that, you know, uh, part
of the question will be why is it needed for tax purposes
as you'll be aware different in a survey, you can ask
for it in survey, but if
Only we, we were retaining 17 gp,
Rob, We're gonna go some subs here,
Dan, and then we've go to Chloe
and then we've got to Todd, what's up?
So, um, another proxy for ethnicity is socioeconomic status.
Is there any way we can work out?
Is it the real working class people
that are disproportionately getting this?
How do we, how can we tell that,
Uh, we might be able, uh,
well we must have information on the income,
the household income.
Yeah. That, uh, I don't know that we've done an analysis,
uh, according to the distribution of that,
but we probably could.
We could do. Okay. Yeah.
But we haven't, as far as
I'm aware, we haven't done that yet.
Okay. I don't wanna put more effort on you, but Yeah.
Yeah.
Something to think about.
Noted the opposition would ask.
Um, one other, one other sub is, um, uh,
just noticed a few early learning centers in my electorate.
Um, they are actually, um,
they do their quarterly statements to their customers quite,
um, procedurally,
and I'm just wondering if that's coming through that
actually a lot of early learning centers are
proactively sending quarterly statements to their customers
so that that's coming
through you rather than lots of different
Yes, yes. In fact,
that was one of the things we worked
with the sector on quite early, was to ensure
that we had a much better flow of the, you know, invoices
and the fact that they're done quarterly so
that people don't have to collect up the,
the weekly or monthly versions. Yeah. I
Think we're sort of up to 80% invoices coming
through quarterly, which makes a huge difference.
It's not across the board, obviously,
'cause it depends on the individual child
center, but, um, most of
Those will be straight through process.
Yeah. Great. Thank you. And
I've got a little kind of a sub
To this Because
one of the issues, well, hang on, hang on. We
Now we're gonna go to Chloe and then
we're gonna come back.
Yeah. Just, just about family members specifically,
just the figures that you were referring to before.
Does the committee have them or otherwise? Can we have them?
Yeah, you can. Absolutely. I mean, I think we're,
we're delivering them
weekly to a number of different places. Uh, happy
To share them. Right. Thank you.
Um, you'll recall that when,
I think it was last year, last year's witness policies.
Yes. Yeah. Yeah. Um, and this scrutiny hearing last year.
Yeah. Um, I was, uh, raising concern about the fact that,
uh, with the way that this policy is being implemented,
if you start from I guess the design principle
or intention of, of living relief, that
it feels relatively similar to the situation
with the accommodation supplement maximum
of evidence shows might only be contributing
to increases in rental prices
because it's effectively a subsidy for the private market.
Same goes in the early childhood sector.
So I guess just I asked you then if you guys would be
monitoring, um, rises in a CE, uh, costs.
Uh, have you been doing that at all?
No. Okay. Not as far as I'm Aware. Yeah. I guess
The Ministry of Education would keep an eye on that.
Mm-hmm. But, but we don't. Yeah.
So to to that effect, how do you gauge
or measure the efficacy of the policy intent?
If the policy intent is to reduce the cost of living,
and we've got a situation where you have a product
that being early childhood or service early childhood
education that costs X, Y, z, we know that, uh, you know,
people are able to recoup costs to a certain extent.
But, you know, these private providers
are able to just fill that gap.
Yeah. So, yeah. How do you measure the efficacy? Is it
Merely we're not measuring the efficacy in the way you've
described at the moment mm-hmm.
Where we've, um, at the moment, particularly
with the shift in the policy settings, um,
the focus at the moment is more about
how efficiently we're able to deliver
that assistance rather than a higher order question.
And I, I guess part of me, I'm,
I'm not sure whether we would be the best
place to do that, actually.
I suspect it may well fall more in the Ministry
of Educations mm-hmm.
Because we, we, we don't actually have
access to that information.
Mm-hmm. That would be the biggest challenge.
Yeah. I mean, I guess what we can derive from that is
that from the IR D's perspective, not
to put words into your mouth,
but what you are measuring is the uptake of Correct.
Effectively this, um, uh, money getting out the door. Yeah.
Which for all intents and purposes,
and for sake of a, I guess political point is
that the government is measuring success based on
how much it's spending not on cost of living reduction.
Excellent. Okay. Todd, um, to just clean this up Yeah.
A bit, well, kind of related, it just triggered a thought
because, uh, one of the issues, um, uh, Dr.
J Russell is Yeah. How do you reach taxpayers?
And then it is in, it's interesting,
obviously you've got this automation
with the childcare providers, but pretty
simple question obviously.
Um, we know that you'll know the number of people,
individual taxpayers, that have an IRD number,
but then how many of 'em have a my IRD account?
Not A big question because Yeah,
Yeah.
Because they're different things,
Right? Uh, they
are, um,
I can't tell you off the top of my head. Well, I
Think that'd be a great thing to come back.
'cause Yeah, yeah. I, I'm just keen to know
what is the uptake of people
actually registering to get in my
So is your question more about, um, to what extent,
so, so to what extent are customers sort
of digitally engaging with us? Yeah.
Because obviously you'll have, there'll be question
however many million New Zealanders have an ir
because everyone has to have an IRD number.
I mean Yep.
Nothing secret from you guys, but I'm, I'm curious to know
because obviously the more people that it,
that have a my IR account, you can reach them
with information about their potential benefits, et cetera.
So I'm just, yeah.
I was looking in here and I was like, I can't
Actually find Yeah, no, it's not in there.
Uh, and I can certainly have a look at that.
I'm, I'm sitting here wondering,
I'm hoping it's relatively straightforward.
I'm, I'm worried about things like,
people might have an IRD number
but might be living overseas.
They may or may not have a my IR account,
so what's just anu like, yeah,
we can certainly ca capture a number,
but yeah, it's just interesting.
Right. And I think bingo. Alright. Thank you. Thank
You. Okay. Ryan, how
Much? Oh, thanks. This
just a supplement suck.
If I could, um, Todd makes a good point
because my IR is actually linked to every entity
or GST number as well.
So there could be a lot of companies
or entities without correct my IR access.
So they'd be missing out on some of that tax knowledge.
And I know for someone like myself, it's, it's,
you've got protected information,
you can't just email it direct, it's gotta go through that.
But it is, it is another layer of, um,
nuisance I guess for an individual.
Yeah. Because they've gotta log in and then,
but, um, that's my way,
My biggest problem is always remembering my,
Yeah.
Just yeah. Back to uh, which back to the family boost.
Yeah. If I heard, heard you correctly, essentially
what I've understood from the last time you presented to us
with the change in policy settings,
the up the uptake sounds like it's exponentially increasing
as well as the retro specifically
because of that four year backlog.
Is that, would that be fair? Yeah.
That, that's off the first quarter
seems to be the evidence.
Thank you. Okay.
Um, members
and panelists, I'm in your hands as to whether we continue.
Uh, I'm very conscious
that you three have been in the hot seat here
for coming up two hours.
Uh, or whether you wanna take a 10 minute break.
Yes, a 10 minute break would be good. That would be good.
Okay. Let's do, let's do that. Let's, let's resume at 3 25.